README.md, before:

# Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks

Code implemented using the [Fortran Package Manager](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/).

Main paper: *Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks*, by Hugo P. Maia, Wesley Cota, Yamir Moreno, and Silvio C. Ferreira.

Reference: [arxiv:2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174) [DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174)

## Hyper-SIS Dynamical Model

This code simulates SIS dynamics on hypergraphs (Hyper-SIS). Each of the $N$ agents can be either susceptible ($\sigma_i = 0$) or infected ($\sigma_i = 1$). Infections occur via hyperedges, which are active if a critical mass of members is infected, while infected nodes recover spontaneously.

Key points:

- Node recovery rate: $\alpha = 1$.
- Hyperedge activation threshold: $\theta(m) = 1 + (m-1)\theta_0$, where $m$ is the hyperedge order.
- Infection rate as a function of hyperedge order: $\beta(m) = \beta[1 + b(m-1)]$.
- Pairwise infection rate: $\beta(1) = \beta$.
- Parameters `par_b` and `par_theta` correspond to $b$ and $\theta_0$.

See the main paper for full details.

## Using it as a dependency

Add this package as a dependency using the [Fortran Package Manager](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/) (fpm):

```toml
[dependencies]
hyperSIS.git = "https://github.com/gisc-ufv/hyperSIS"
```

See the [documentation](http://pages.giscbr.org/hyperSIS/) and main program for details.

## Python package Installation

💡 ***A Google Colab notebook demonstrating all installation and usage steps is available [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KZanZNdr1M6bEEfw0vdAGBpkHyVrV9XH?usp=sharing).***

The easiest way to use this project is through its Python interface.

This package will be published on PyPI in the future. Until then, you need to clone the repository manually.

Before installing, make sure that at least one Fortran compiler is available. By default, the package assumes **GNU Fortran** (`gfortran`) installed and available in your PATH. See [Installing GFortran](https://fortran-lang.org/learn/os_setup/install_gfortran/) for help.

Steps:

1. Clone the repository and enter it:

    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/gisc-ufv/hyperSIS.git
    cd hyperSIS
    ```

2. Activate your preferred Python environment (e.g., `venv`, `conda`, etc.):

    ```sh
    # Example with venv
    python -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate

    # Example with conda
    conda create -n hyperSIS python=3.11
    conda activate hyperSIS
    ```

3. Install the Python package:

    ```sh
    pip install ./python
    ```

    - If you want to use another compiler and/or Fortran flags, set the `FC` and `FFLAGS`.

    ```sh
    # Optional: customize the Fortran compiler and flags
    export FC=gfortran # default is gfortran
    export FFLAGS="-O3 -march=native -funroll-loops" # adjust optimization flags
    pip install ./python
    ```

4. Verify if `gfortran` and `fpm` are accessible:

    ```sh
    gfortran --version
    fpm --version
    ```

## Usage

*See [examples.ipynb](https://github.com/gisc-ufv/hyperSIS/blob/main/examples.ipynb) for examples.*

Import the package with

```python
import hyperSIS as hs
```

The simulation interface revolves around **two main objects**:

1. `SimulationArgs`
   A dataclass containing all parameters required to configure a hyperSIS simulation, including network specification, algorithm choices, temporal settings, initial conditions, and epidemic parameters.

2. `run_simulation(beta1: float, args: SimulationArgs)`
   The function that executes the simulation with the given arguments. Returns a `SimulationResult` object containing the processed results, including network mapping, temporal evolution, and statistics of infected nodes.

### Simulation arguments

The `SimulationArgs` dataclass contains all configurable parameters for running a hyperSIS simulation.

- `verbose: bool`
  Enable verbose output.
  Default: `True`

- `verbose_level: str`
  Logging level: `'info'`, `'warning'`, `'error'`, `'debug'`.
  Default: `warning`

- `seed: int`
  Random seed for reproducibility.
  Default: `42`

- `remove_files: bool`
  Remove temporary files after execution.
  Default: `False`

- `network: NetworkFormat`
  Network specification as a tuple. Optional parameters are in brackets:
  - `("edgelist", path, [delimiter], [comment], [cache])`
  - `("fortran-edgelist", path, [cache])`
  - `("bipartite", path, [delimiter], [comment], [cache])`
  - `("xgi", name_or_object, [cache])`
  - `("xgi_json", path, [cache])`
  - `("hif", path, [cache])`
  - `("PL", gamma, N, [sample])`
  Default: `("edgelist", "example.edgelist", None, "#", False)`

- `output_dir: Optional[str]`
  Directory to store simulation output. If `None`, a temporary folder is used.
  Default: `None`

- `algorithm: str`
  Simulation algorithm: `'HB_OGA'` or `'NB_OGA'`.
  Default: `HB_OGA`

- `sampler: str`
  Sampling method: `'rejection_maxheap'` or `'btree'`.
  Default: `btree`

- `tmax: int`
  Maximum simulation time.
  Default: `100`

- `use_qs: bool`
  Whether to use the quasi-stationary method.
  Default: `False`

- `n_samples: int`
  Number of samples per simulation.
  Default: `10`

- `time_scale: str`
  Temporal scale for output: `'uniform'` or `'powerlaw'`.
  Default: `uniform`

- `initial_condition: tuple`
  Initial state specification:
  - `('fraction', float)` → fraction of infected nodes
  - `('number', int)` → exact number of initially infected nodes
  Default: `("fraction", 1.0)`

- `export_states: bool`
  Whether to export the full state trajectory.
  Default: `False`

- `par_b: float`
  Epidemic infection rate scale $b$ in $\beta(m) = \beta[1 + b(m-1)]$.
  Default: `0.5`

- `par_theta: float`
  Epidemic critical mass threshold $\theta_0$ in $\theta(m) = 1 + (m-1)\theta_0$.
  Default: `0.5`

### Function

```python
run_simulation(beta1: float, args: SimulationArgs)
```

Runs a Hyper-SIS simulation on the specified network.

**Parameters:**

- `beta1: float`
  Base infection rate $\beta(1)$ for pairwise interactions.
- `args: SimulationArgs`
  Simulation parameters, including network specification, algorithm choice, number of samples, initial condition, and epidemic parameters `par_b` and `par_theta`.

**Returns:**

- `SimulationResult`
  Object containing:

  - `network: NetworkFormat` – the network specification used.
  - `node_map: dict` – mapping from original node IDs to Fortran node IDs.
  - `temporal: TemporalResult` – temporal dynamics with:
    - `t: np.ndarray` – mean time per Gillespie tick.
    - `rho_avg: np.ndarray` – mean number of infected nodes over all runs.
    - `rho_var: np.ndarray` – variance of infected nodes.
    - `n_samples: int` – number of runs where infection is non-zero.

## How to Cite

When using this package, please cite the following paper:

*Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks*, by Hugo P. Maia, Wesley Cota, Yamir Moreno, and Silvio C. Ferreira (2025)

Reference: [arxiv:2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174) [DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174)

The BibTeX entry is:

```bib
@misc{maia2025hoga,
      title={Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks},
      author={Hugo P. Maia and Wesley Cota and Yamir Moreno and Silvio C. Ferreira},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2509.20174},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={physics.soc-ph},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174},
}
```

Commit message:

Bump version to 1.1.9 in fpm.toml and __init__.py; update README sections for clarity

README.md, after:

# Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks

Code implemented using the [Fortran Package Manager](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/).

Main paper: *Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks*, by Hugo P. Maia, Wesley Cota, Yamir Moreno, and Silvio C. Ferreira.

Reference: [arxiv:2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174) [DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174)

## Hyper-SIS Dynamical Model

This code simulates SIS dynamics on hypergraphs (Hyper-SIS). Each of the $N$ agents can be either susceptible ($\sigma_i = 0$) or infected ($\sigma_i = 1$). Infections occur via hyperedges, which are active if a critical mass of members is infected, while infected nodes recover spontaneously.

Key points:

- Node recovery rate: $\alpha = 1$.
- Hyperedge activation threshold: $\theta(m) = 1 + (m-1)\theta_0$, where $m$ is the hyperedge order.
- Infection rate as a function of hyperedge order: $\beta(m) = \beta[1 + b(m-1)]$.
- Pairwise infection rate: $\beta(1) = \beta$.
- Parameters `par_b` and `par_theta` correspond to $b$ and $\theta_0$.

See the main paper for full details.

## Using it as a Fortran dependency

Add this package as a dependency using the [Fortran Package Manager](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/) (fpm):

```toml
[dependencies]
hyperSIS.git = "https://github.com/gisc-ufv/hyperSIS"
```

See the [documentation](http://pages.giscbr.org/hyperSIS/) and main program for details.

## Python package

💡 ***A Google Colab notebook demonstrating all installation and usage steps is available [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KZanZNdr1M6bEEfw0vdAGBpkHyVrV9XH?usp=sharing).***

The easiest way to use this project is through its Python interface.

### Via `PyPI` (`pip`)

Use `pip install hyperSIS` to install it.

### Build python package

In this case, you need to clone the repository manually.

Before installing, make sure that at least one Fortran compiler is available. By default, the package assumes **GNU Fortran** (`gfortran`) installed and available in your PATH. See [Installing GFortran](https://fortran-lang.org/learn/os_setup/install_gfortran/) for help.

Steps:

1. Clone the repository and enter it:

    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/gisc-ufv/hyperSIS.git
    cd hyperSIS
    ```

2. Activate your preferred Python environment (e.g., `venv`, `conda`, etc.):

    ```sh
    # Example with venv
    python -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate

    # Example with conda
    conda create -n hyperSIS python=3.11
    conda activate hyperSIS
    ```

3. Install the Python package:

    ```sh
    pip install ./python
    ```

    - If you want to use another compiler and/or Fortran flags, set the `FC` and `FFLAGS`.

    ```sh
    # Optional: customize the Fortran compiler and flags
    export FC=gfortran # default is gfortran
    export FFLAGS="-O3 -march=native -funroll-loops" # adjust optimization flags
    pip install ./python
    ```

## Usage (Python)

*See [examples.ipynb](https://github.com/gisc-ufv/hyperSIS/blob/main/examples.ipynb) and [Google Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KZanZNdr1M6bEEfw0vdAGBpkHyVrV9XH?usp=sharing) for examples.*

Import the package with

```python
import hyperSIS as hs
```

The simulation interface revolves around **two main objects**:

1. `SimulationArgs`
   A dataclass containing all parameters required to configure a hyperSIS simulation, including network specification, algorithm choices, temporal settings, initial conditions, and epidemic parameters.

2. `run_simulation(beta1: float, args: SimulationArgs)`
   The function that executes the simulation with the given arguments. Returns a `SimulationResult` object containing the processed results, including network mapping, temporal evolution, and statistics of infected nodes.

### Simulation arguments

The `SimulationArgs` dataclass contains all configurable parameters for running a hyperSIS simulation.

- `verbose: bool`
  Enable verbose output.
  Default: `True`

- `verbose_level: str`
  Logging level: `'info'`, `'warning'`, `'error'`, `'debug'`.
  Default: `warning`

- `seed: int`
  Random seed for reproducibility.
  Default: `42`

- `remove_files: bool`
  Remove temporary files after execution.
  Default: `False`

- `network: NetworkFormat`
  Network specification as a tuple. Optional parameters are in brackets:
  - `("edgelist", path, [delimiter], [comment], [cache])`
  - `("fortran-edgelist", path, [cache])`
  - `("bipartite", path, [delimiter], [comment], [cache])`
  - `("xgi", name_or_object, [cache])`
  - `("xgi_json", path, [cache])`
  - `("hif", path, [cache])`
  - `("PL", gamma, N, [sample])`
  Default: `("edgelist", "example.edgelist", None, "#", False)`

- `output_dir: Optional[str]`
  Directory to store simulation output. If `None`, a temporary folder is used.
  Default: `None`

- `algorithm: str`
  Simulation algorithm: `'HB_OGA'` or `'NB_OGA'`.
  Default: `HB_OGA`

- `sampler: str`
  Sampling method: `'rejection_maxheap'` or `'btree'`.
  Default: `btree`

- `tmax: int`
  Maximum simulation time.
  Default: `100`

- `use_qs: bool`
  Whether to use the quasi-stationary method.
  Default: `False`

- `n_samples: int`
  Number of samples per simulation.
  Default: `10`

- `time_scale: str`
  Temporal scale for output: `'uniform'` or `'powerlaw'`.
  Default: `uniform`

- `initial_condition: tuple`
  Initial state specification:
  - `('fraction', float)` → fraction of infected nodes
  - `('number', int)` → exact number of initially infected nodes
  Default: `("fraction", 1.0)`

- `export_states: bool`
  Whether to export the full state trajectory.
  Default: `False`

- `par_b: float`
  Epidemic infection rate scale $b$ in $\beta(m) = \beta[1 + b(m-1)]$.
  Default: `0.5`

- `par_theta: float`
  Epidemic critical mass threshold $\theta_0$ in $\theta(m) = 1 + (m-1)\theta_0$.
  Default: `0.5`

### Function

```python
run_simulation(beta1: float, args: SimulationArgs)
```

Runs a Hyper-SIS simulation on the specified network.

**Parameters:**

- `beta1: float`
  Base infection rate $\beta(1)$ for pairwise interactions.
- `args: SimulationArgs`
  Simulation parameters, including network specification, algorithm choice, number of samples, initial condition, and epidemic parameters `par_b` and `par_theta`.

**Returns:**

- `SimulationResult`
  Object containing:

  - `network: NetworkFormat` – the network specification used.
  - `node_map: dict` – mapping from original node IDs to Fortran node IDs.
  - `temporal: TemporalResult` – temporal dynamics with:
    - `t: np.ndarray` – mean time per Gillespie tick.
    - `rho_avg: np.ndarray` – mean number of infected nodes over all runs.
    - `rho_var: np.ndarray` – variance of infected nodes.
    - `n_samples: int` – number of runs where infection is non-zero.

## Fortran executable `hyperSIS_sampling`

Read [hyperSIS_sampling.md](https://github.com/gisc-ufv/tree/main/hyperSIS_sampling.md) for instructions.

## How to Cite

When using this package, please cite the following paper:

*Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks*, by Hugo P. Maia, Wesley Cota, Yamir Moreno, and Silvio C. Ferreira (2025)

Reference: [arxiv:2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174) [DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2509.20174](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174)

The BibTeX entry is:

```bib
@misc{maia2025hoga,
      title={Efficient Gillespie algorithms for spreading phenomena in large and heterogeneous higher-order networks},
      author={Hugo P. Maia and Wesley Cota and Yamir Moreno and Silvio C. Ferreira},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2509.20174},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={physics.soc-ph},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20174},
}
```
